Hi, while both banks and shareholders provide money
to business it's important to be aware of some
key distinctions, depending on the origin of the
funds, as will be discussed in this lecture.
First there is a gigantic difference in terms of
compensation. Bank debt is not for free as interest
payments are legally due, failing to do so will
lead to additional expenses, financial distress,
default, and worst case, bankruptcy. No interest
is due to shareholders although they might get
dividends. There is no hard commitment to pay out
dividends, so these may be scrapped, if profits
were disappointing. No dividends however, don't
apply on shareholders that don't get any return on investment
as they're actually entitled to all earnings
generated. Profits, may either be paid out as a
dividend or retained and reinvested causing a rise
in company and share value. Yet the downside is
that shareholders will need to bear losses. Second, the
firm is to reimburse the bank debt by making
repayments of the principal amount, that maturity
could be anything from a few days to some decades,
but all debt must be paid off. Alternatively,
shareholder capital is normally a permanent investment that will
remain available to the company. If stockholders
want to exit their holdings, they will need to look
for others who want to acquire their shares. In the case of
bankruptcy, all assets are liquidated and the
proceeds are first used to reimburse debt holders.
Priority is actually given to special items like
salaries, taxes, and social security due. Typically
shareholders will not be able to recover much.
Interestingly in most countries debt financing gets
a more favourable treatment by tax authorities as
interest charges, in contrast to dividends
represent a tax deductible cost. Finally, who is
in control and essentially has a final say upon
any major corporate decision. Even in cases where
banks put in much more funds than shareholders, it is the
latter that decide as they are the ultimate
owners and have voting rights unlike banks. You
might have guessed it would be the board of
directors or the CEO, sure but in the end these
individuals are nominated by shareholders. Yet
banks will have indirect influence as they can
force firms into bankruptcy, in the case of default.
Moreover, loan contracts will predictably include
conditions and covenants that affect a board of
shareholders, such as limits on dividend payouts,
additional debt that can be raised, bank approval for
capex and any major decisions.
Keep in mind that both sources of financing have
benefits and drawbacks. There is no real optimal
balance, and the depth of such a choice will depend
on the company's specific situation, the financial
market conditions, and shareholders risk appetite. However,
companies should not have too much debt, as
we will highlight when discussing solvency.